# Mesa/Boogie Subway Rocket
The Mesa/Boogie Subway Rocket is the newest addition to my recording studio;
it's a 22 Watt vacuum-tube guitar amplifier.

![Mesa/Boogie Subway Rocket](http://bryan.ravensight.org/wp-content/photos/2009/04-07%20-%20Subway%20Rocket/IMG_6568.jpg "Mesa/Boogie Subway Rocket")

### Specs

  * 2 Channels: Rhythm and Lead+Switchable Contour
  * 3 Band Shared EQ
  * 22 Watts: 4x12AX7 Preamp Tubes &amp; 2xEL84 Power Tubes
  * Parallel Effects Loop with Mix Control
  * 8-4-4 OHM Outputs
  * Eminence 10" 50 Watt 8 OHM Speaker (Labeled as Vintage Black Shadow)

### On to the details

I have been considering making the jump to a tube amp for a while but the cost
has always put me off. I have a collection of solid state amps that have given
me great tone and I could never find a tube amp for less than $1000 that
sounded significantly better than the amps I already had. Nevertheless, any
time a new reasonably-priced tube amp shows up in my GC (Guitar Center)
catalog, I have to go try it out. It was on one of these treks where I
encountered the Subway Rocket.

I went into GC specifically to try out a second-hand Crate V33 they had priced
to move. After ten minutes of tinkering, I was completely turned off. But I
figured while I was there, I'd have some fun. So I grabbed a nice Strat and
plugged into the ol' standby: the Fender Blues Junior. The Blues Junior has
always held a certain quality that attracts me. Set the gain at 7, roll back
the volume on a neck-position single coil, and let the tubes sing. I've always
loved the sound, but I could never justify spending $600 on an amp when I have
an old $200 Fender Automatic that cries quite beautifully in it's own (albiet,
solid state) right. Well, while I was enjoying the tone pouring from the
Junior, I glanced over and spotted a small combo amp with the logo which has
become sort of a holy grail for me: Mesa/Boogie.

I think the main reason Mesa/Boogie has reached holy grail status for me is
that I never thought I would be able to afford one. I've been a fan of John
Petrucci (of Dream Theater) for a long time and his guitar tone is what set
the bar for me. Any time he plays you're sure to see a wall of Mesa/Boogie
cabinets and his trusty Mark IIC+ amp heads. Those heads alone sell for
$2500+, and since I'm not making a living off of my guitar playing, I could
never justify spending anywhere near that amount of money on an amp. But man,
is the tone incredible.

Now, my first thought as I looked at this unassuming combo amp was, "That has
to be some kind of marketing gimmick". I thought that there was no way Mesa
could get the wall of tone that they're famous for into a 10" combo. But just
for fun, I decided to plug in a see how it sounded. After five minutes, I was
completely sold; this amp is amazing.

I've now had it for a week, I've put it through it's paces, and I have to say,
I'm still completely sold. The rhythm channel on this amp at half gain is the
silkiest, smoothest blues grit I've ever heard. Flip it into the lead channel
with the gain at 8 and you're in metal land. Step on the contour switch and
stand back! Even though it's a 10" combo, this thing will make your ears
bleed. I set the lead channel volume at 2 in my recording room (a huge open
room with vaulted ceilings) and I couldn't take it for more than a couple of
minutes; I had to turn it down. My final test was to throw an SM57 in front of
it to see how it would track to "tape" without too much fuss and I wasn't
disapointed. That magical thing about microphones is that they don't care how
big the speaker is; it sounds monstrous. I'll have some clips of the recording
up here shortly.

In a final word, this amp is the perfect studio guitarist/owner's friend. It's
extremely versatile and because it was built by Mesa/Boogie, it is truly a
professional piece of equipment. Just by looking at it, you get the impression
that it was built to last. If you're a guitarist in the market for your first
tube amp, I HIGHLY recommend seeking out one of these amps. This is one piece
of gear I will never sell.

### More Photos

![Mesa/Boogie Subway Rocket](http://bryan.ravensight.org/wp-content/photos/2009/04-07%20-%20Subway%20Rocket/IMG_6562.jpg "Mesa/Boogie Subway Rocket Front")

![Mesa/Boogie Subway Rocket](http://bryan.ravensight.org/wp-content/photos/2009/04-07%20-%20Subway%20Rocket/IMG_6567.jpg "Mesa/Boogie Subway Rocket Switches")

![Mesa/Boogie Subway Rocket](http://bryan.ravensight.org/wp-content/photos/2009/04-07%20-%20Subway%20Rocket/IMG_6568.jpg "Mesa/Boogie Subway Rocket Knobs")

![Mesa/Boogie Subway Rocket](http://bryan.ravensight.org/wp-content/photos/2009/04-07%20-%20Subway%20Rocket/IMG_6583.jpg "Mesa/Boogie Subway Rocket Rear")

![Mesa/Boogie Subway Rocket](http://bryan.ravensight.org/wp-content/photos/2009/04-07%20-%20Subway%20Rocket/IMG_6590.jpg "Mesa/Boogie Subway Rocket FX Loop")

![Mesa/Boogie Subway Rocket](http://bryan.ravensight.org/wp-content/photos/2009/04-07%20-%20Subway%20Rocket/IMG_6595.jpg "Mesa/Boogie Subway Rocket Footswitch")

Thanks for stopping by!
